---
layout: post
title:  "Project Euler P1 - Multiples of 3 and 5"
date:   2021-01-16 18:00:00
categories: project_euler
tags: simple
---

Here we comes the first problem, which is probably the easiest one. The [problem](https://projecteuler.net/problem=1) states:

> If we list all the natural numbers below 10 that are multiples of 3 or 5, we get 3, 5, 6 and 9. The sum of these multiples is 23.
>
> Find the sum of all the multiples of 3 or 5 below 1000.

## Brute-force Approach

Someone who is familiar with Python can probably find the answer with a one-liner like:

```python
sum(filter(lambda x: x % 3 == 0 or x % 5 == 0, range(1,1000)))
```

For someone who is new to programming, this might few a bit dense. Let me try to tear it apart. First `%` represents a [modulo operator](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modulo_operation) in most common programming languages, which returns the reminder of an integer division. For example, `10 % 3` gives 1. Therefore, one can use `x % 3 == 0` to test if `x` is a multiple of 3.

The `range(1,1000)` is an useful builtin in Python that returns a list `[1, 2, 3, ... 998, 999]`. There is a more general variant of  `range` that also take a `step` argument. For example, `range(2, 100, 3)` gives `[2, 5, 8, ... 95, 98]`.

The `filter` is another builtin that returns a list of elements that make the condition true. The condition is expressed as a lambda function. You can learn more about how to use Python lambda functions [here](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/python-lambda-anonymous-functions-filter-map-reduce).

Finally, yet another builtin `sum` returns the sum of all elements.

One final comment before we move on, Python is a good fit for solving these nice little problems quickly. In particular, one should be familar with [list comprehension](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/datastructures.html#list-comprehensions), which is a very power tool in Python that can make things like this much easier.

### Time Complexity

We should also discuss a little bit about [time complexity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_complexity) here. Roughly speaking, it is a way to describe how long it takes a computer to run an algorithm. We usually use the Big-O notation. For example, when we say an algorithm is $$O(n)
$$, it means the time it take to run this algorithm is proportional to the input size $$n$$.  In this case, we also call the algorithm runs in linear time. See [here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_complexity#Table_of_common_time_complexities) for a list of common time complexities. 

As a rule of thumb, a problem with input size of $$10^9$$ can be solved within one second using an $O(n)$ using a morden computer. This gives a convenient way to estimate if your algorithm will be good enough. For example, if you devised a $$O(n^3)$$ solution, and the input size is about $$10^4$$, it will require $$10^3$$ seconds, about 16 minutes to find the answer.

According to the website, the problems listed on Project Euler can all be solved within one minute. So brute-force might not work all the time.

Now, what is the time complexity of this problem? It should be $$O(n)$$ as we have to enumerate each number once. This means if it takes $$t$$ seconds to find the sum of all mutiples of 3 or 5 below 1000, it will take roughly $$10t$$ time if we change  1000 to 10000.

## Mathematical Approach

Can we do better? Yes, but we need a little bit help from math.

Notice that natural number that is a multiple of 3 can be represented as $$3n$$ . These numbers a finite [arithmetic progressions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arithmetic_progression). The sum can be easily computed if we know the number of terms. Since $$3n < 1000$$, we got $n \leq 333$. This means we have 333 numbers which are multiple of 3. Similarly $$5n < 1000$$ gives $$n \leq 199$$.

Pay attention that natural numbers that are multiple of 15 are counted twice here, since such a number is a multiple of both 3 and 5. So we have to subtract these numbers once. Putting things together, we have
$$
\begin{aligned}
S &= \sum_{i=1}^{333} 3i + \sum_{i=1}^{199} 5i - \sum_{i=1}^{66} 15i \\
  &= s\sum_{i=1}^{333} i + 5\sum_{i=1}^{199} i - 15\sum_{i=1}^{66} i \\
  &= 3\times\frac{333(1+333)}{2} + 5\times\frac{199(1+199)}{2} - 15\times\frac{66(1+66)}{2} \\
  &= \fbox{233168}
\end{aligned}
$$

The last step uses the well-known [triangular number formula](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Triangular_number#Formula).

The time complexity for this approach will be $$O(1)$$, a.k.a, constant time.

