---
layout: post
title:  "Project Euler P3 - Largest prime factor"
date:   2021-01-24 18:00:00
categories: project_euler
tags: brute-force, prime_number
---

The third problem is about [prime number](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prime_number). The [problem](https://projecteuler.net/problem=3) states:

> The prime factors of 13195 are 5, 7, 13 and 29.
> What is the largest prime factor of the number 600851475143 ?

We know that by the [Fundamental theorem of arithmetic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fundamental_theorem_of_arithmetic), every positive integer $$n > 1$$ has an unique prime factorization: $$n = p_1^{n_1}p_2^{n_2}\dots p_k^{n_k}$$, where $$p_1 < p_2 < \dots < p_k$$. Therefore, if we can find the prime factorization for $$n$$, we find the answer.

Unfortunately, for sufficient large numbers, no efficient algorithm for [prime factorization](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Integer_factorization) has been discovered for classic computers. However, if you have a quantum computer, there exists an algorithm called [Shor's algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shor%27s_algorithm) that can find all prime factors in polynomial time. It still remains as an unknown problem that whether integer factorization can be solved in polynomial time on a classic computer.

That being said, we apparently don't have access to a quantum computer. Luckily,  600,851,475,143 is not too big. It is about $$10^{12}$$ or $$2^{40}$$. Our idea is to start from the smallest possible prime factor $$p$$, and test if $$p$$ is a factor of $$n$$. If it is, then we remove the all the  $$p^k$$ factor from $$n$$. We repeat this process until $$n$$ becomes 1. This algorithm runs in $$O(n)$$ time in the worse case, because if $$n$$ itself is a prime number, no number other than itself and 1 can divide $$n$$, and we have to iterate $$n$$ time to figure it out. There are a few things we can optimize here:

1. Notice that we only need to go up to $$\left \lfloor{\sqrt{n}}\right \rfloor$$. This is because if there exists $$\left \lfloor{\sqrt{n}}\right \rfloor < a < n$$ such that $$n=ab$$, then $$b$$ must also be a factor of $$n$$ , and since $$b < \left \lfloor{\sqrt{n}}\right \rfloor$$, we should have found it in the previous search.
2. We can start our search from 3, and only check odd numbers. This is due to the fact that 600,851,475,143 is an odd number, and the only even prime number 2 cannot be a factor.

This improves our algorithm to $$O(\sqrt{n})$$ overall, which is probably good enough.

It turns out this runs pretty fast, and we found $$600851475143 = 71\times839\times1471\times6857$$.

```python
import math

n = 600851475143
i = 3
ans = -1
while n > 1 && i < math.sqrt(600851475143):
    while n % i == 0:
        ans = i
        n /= i
    i += 2
print ans
```

